	Where Gonzalez-Torres redeploys and revises minimalist forms and formal strategies, he builds upon post-minimalist techniques of “anti-form,” which emerged during the late 1960s and 1970s in response to minimalist orthodoxies about sculpture; namely, the idea that sculpture exhibits a fixed and present form in relation to its equally fixed and present environment. These techniques include the introduction of chance, process, and unusual materials to minimalist aesthetics, guided by the belief that one cannot program or determine form in advance. It is not that sculpture is its form—the material manifestation of its formal ontology—but that sculpture occurs in the continual becoming of what is mutable and aleatory. This is to conceive sculpture in the impossibility of achieving a present, self-evident, and complete figure, which is to reject modernist models that privilege the apprehension of art in and as its material form; e.g. the instantaneous perceptual presence of Clement Greenberg and Michael Fried’s formalism or the systematic deduction of a priori structures, as in the configuration of Andre's Equivalents or the mathematical compositions of Donald Judd and Sol LeWitt. In the stacks and piles, sculpture marks the undoing of form, inasmuch as their creation enacts their own negation. Or as Gonzalez-Torres states of his art: “I destroy the work before I make it." "I have destroyed it already, from day one."
	This kind of originary negation, for which the work is born of its own destruction, is perhaps the overarching principle of the stacks and piles. To the extent that these works appear they are also disappearing. To that (non-teleological) end, their function is to preserve a state of decay via the endless deferral of their complete disappearance. In that sense, these works follow the function of the death drive, both in the auto-destructive mechanics of creative production and in their awareness of the presence of death in all life and life-processes. Following the standard Freudian account, the death drive manifests its instincts in a compulsive working toward death, a destructive impulse guided by the desire to achieve an inorganic state of requiescence. These instincts are evident in the repetitive-compulsive self-negation that the stacks and piles exercise in working toward non-existence, although they never realize that state. A work never becomes nothing nor ceases to exist, its raison d'être is to move between existence and non-existence, avoiding the finality of disappearance in favour of a transitive disappearing. Moreover, works do not end when they are withdrawn from exhibition. Even if a stack or pile is taken off display or runs out of items (occasionally exhibitors choose not to refill them), the work remains potentially manifest, given the possibility of starting anew at another time or place (barring certain exceptions). More significantly, as parts continue to circulate, along with the meanings and experiences they generate, they extend beyond the work’s initial display. Although the stacks and piles may not appear as such, they reserve an afterlife in the continual distribution of parts out into the world.
	While this distribution allows the stacks and piles to exist, in and as their constitutive destruction, it also serves as a mournful gesture, revealing an embodiment of loss. This is the sense in which Freud describes the death drive in terms of loss, famously exemplified by his grandson’s “fort-da” game: by continually throwing and retrieving a spool of yarn while respectively calling out “fort” (“gone”) and “da” (“there”), he could exercise symbolic mastery over the painful absence of his mother. Similarly, in the repetition-compulsion by which the stacks and piles stage and re-stage disappearance, these works continually perform their destruction as a means of confronting loss. As Gonzalez-Torres explains: “Freud said we rehearse our fears in order to lessen them. In a way this ‘letting go’ of the work, this refusal to make a static form… in favor of a disappearing, changing, unstable, and fragile form was an attempt on my part to rehearse my own fears of having [my partner] Ross disappear day by day right in front of my eyes.” For Gonzalez-Torres, this process presents a practice of grief that neither abandons the lost object by consummating the work of mourning nor restores a lost relation to its prior fullness. Whereas mourning typically consists in dispelling psychic attachments to a lost object, to repair the injured ego, and where pathological or melancholic mourning consists in a refusal to cede severed attachments to a lost object, resulting in a pathological identification with it, these works enact non-teleological, non-restorative mourning: a process of unlimited mourning that confronts the immanence of death by sustaining the experience of loss. In that respect, the stacks and piles confront loss by constantly re-staging it, sustaining an open-ended process of mourning that occurs in the constant working toward death. This process inverts the function of the death drive so that this endless economy of loss paradoxically drives the continuation of life, a possibility of life after death, carried out in the interactions that persist even after Ross or Gonzalez-Torres' own deaths.

Undoing Subjects: Positions and Bodies
	To the extent that "having Ross disappear day by day” inspires Gonzalez-Torres’ practice, his work raises the question of precisely what role Ross plays therein. As both an object of loss and, in many cases, the named subject of certain stacks and piles, it is never clear how he does or does not figure into these works. Because these works are physically separate from any aesthetic or ontological unity, they complicate our ability to accurately identify anyone as the stable subject or object of a given work. By reformatting the art object, such that it is impossible to apprehend it as the material manifestation of a formal essence, Gonzalez-Torres deconstructs the aesthetic presence of a fixed subject. He thereby undoes the subject-object structure of representation, such that it becomes impossible to locate a subject in the form of a distinct body, identity, or name that anchors the work’s meaning. When Gonzalez-Torres represents someone, he represents something other than the objective manifestation of a given identity or the embodiment of a self-identical individual. The questions of who these works are about, for whom, and how, thus become relevant. 
	Throughout the rest of this chapter, I pursue these questions by addressing the subjects that Gonzalez-Torres names in his work: persons, in addition to places and events, that are never quite present in the work but leave their absent mark in its dissemination. I consider how subjects simultaneously enter into, and depart from, these works, particularly in Gonzalez-Torres' portraits. As ostensible representations of named individuals, his portraits complicate the process of representing an individual at all, upending their very function as portraits. This is the case for works such as "Untitled" (Portrait of Ross in L.A.) (1991) [fig. 1.8], and "Untitled" (Lover Boys) (1991), candy piles that invoke a particular person; namely, the eponymous Ross, Gonzalez-Torres’ partner who died in 1991. It is obviously possible to view these works with a specific person in mind, although the ways they do—or do not—invoke such figures or suppose any relation to them is never simple. While a name as explicit as "Portrait of Ross" certainly implies the representation of a specific subject, Gonzalez-Torres complicates this designation by questioning our ability to adequately position that subject within the work; i.e. inside the art object. The viewer's relation to the named subject is not necessarily given, for any subjective identity, as any objective form, remains displaced from the work itself.
	One way to explain this displacement is in terms of the work’s abstraction, denoting the means by which it always moves away from a subject or object position. I draw this analysis from Brian Massumi's argument that sense is irreducible to specific, discernible positions; namely, subjectivities and identities that correspond to static nodes in a structural matrix, much like pieces on a chess board. Instead of such positions, Massumi posits the indeterminacy of spatial and temporal unfolding, or what he describes as the ontogenetic becoming or movement of sense, as opposed to its ontology. Analogously, I want to suggest that the stacks and piles are not situated in relation to specific subjects or objects but evade any position that an identifiable form or figure would confer upon it. In the constant evasion of forms and figures and, equally, of fixed meanings and identities, these works exist in and as their abstraction. This is to invoke Massumi's definition of abstraction, which he describes via his Deleuzian/Bergsonian theorization of temporality vis-à-vis the virtual. Following Deleuze's notion of the "real-but-abstract,” Massumi defines the abstract as what is "never present in position, only ever in passing.... an abstractness pertaining to the transitional immediacy of a real relation—that of a body to its own indeterminacy (its openness to an elsewhere and otherwise than it is, in any here and now)." Massumi conceives the body in its irreducibility to any fixed identity or form—the static is of being—and as its pure movement, the constant passage between its occurring and its anticipatory potential, a state of pure transition in which the body is never present to itself. 
	Massumi’s description is particularly useful in articulating the essential non-identity and virtuality of the body. Massumi illustrates the body’s abstractness, insofar as it constantly moves beyond its empirical and ontological limits. As he continues, “[t]he charge of indeterminacy carried by a body is inseparable from it. It strictly coincides with it, to the extent that the body is in passage or in process (to the extent that it is dynamic and alive). But the charge is not itself corporeal. Far from regaining a concreteness, to think the body in movement thus means accepting the paradox that there is an incorporeal dimension of the body. Of it, but not it. Real, material, but incorporeal. Inseparable, coincident, but disjunct.” In these respects, embodiment is neither the objective materialization of a subject (flesh containing an identity) nor the subjective animation of an object (identity manifest in flesh) but a condition of disjoined existence. Specifically, I argue that embodiment consists in the experience of its singular plurality: the body exists in the disjunction of material form and subjective identity and in its displacement from an individual figure. Embodied existence is not, therefore, unified and private but shared in the proliferation of its division and separation from itself (and what is a body if not a process of cells constantly separating from themselves, endlessly dividing and multiplying in the perpetual re-creation of an organism).
	I theorize the body in these terms to illustrate how Gonzalez-Torres’s work, rather than present a corporeal figure, invokes an abstract condition of embodiment. To recapitulate, a given stack or pile exists at the limit-point where its self-negation occurs, the a-topological interstice between inside and outside where it separates from itself. This is the point where the part is taken from the art object and is therefore no longer a part of it; however, this is also the point where the part is most proper to the artwork in and as its dispossession, its apartness. To chart this passage from inside to out is to trace the work in its virtuality, which occurs in the movement of what lacks any discrete coordinates, limits, or identity with which to locate a figure. In the removal and transportation of parts that occurs through the work’s constitutive interactions—the undoing of form that occurs in its displacement—the work constantly moves along uncertain paths, obviating from any discrete position that would affirm any one form or meaning over any other. Within the work, the figure of any subject or object is always-already separate from itself, it is inside the work to the extent it absents itself; it appears only an an abstraction. 
	In these ways, Gonzalez-Torres’ provides a model for understanding the human body in its abstraction. Much as the “body” of a stack or pile exists in the endless division, dispossession, and distribution of its constitutive elements, embodiment occurs in its movement outward, transitioning beyond the delimitation of a specific figure. I do not mean to equate bodies and artworks but to conceive the stacks and piles as ersatz-bodies: they stand in for bodies by way of their shared abstractness. In lieu of the body itself, these works conjure the body’s virtuality, including the conditions by which the body fails to materialize as an identifiable figure. Gonzalez-Torres does not then represent bodies as much as his works act as metonyms for embodiment, conjuring the body without reproducing the logos of a specific figure. By envisioning a body that is separate from both the artwork and its own physical form, he presents the body as something essentially abstract, something that becomes virtual in its dispersal and extension over space and time. In the absence of recognizable signs, apprehending the body becomes a matter of tracing the trajectories by which it evades the presentation of an identifiable figure. This does not mean that the body does not exist in any concrete form but that it "is as immediately abstract as it is concrete; its activity and expressivity extend, as on their underside, into an incorporeal, yet perfectly real, dimension of pressing potential.” Or to paraphrase Gonzalez-Torres, the body is always simultaneously nowhere other than this place and somewhere other than this place; it is always apparent in itself, but always extends beyond the boundaries of its appearance.

Undoing Portraits
	Thinking the body in terms of its abstraction is key to understanding Gonzalez-Torres’s deconstruction of portraiture, inasmuch as the body traditionally serves as the ground on which to represent and recognize a subject. In its identificatory function, the conventional portrait presents the body as the formal materialization of its subject within a discrete figure, marking the visible junction between the interiority of the self’s existence and the exteriority of the world. Portraiture presents its subject as a material signifier, binding identity and corporeality into a unified image that combines exposition and recognition. Given these aesthetic functions, we may consider how the stacks and piles work as portraits if, as I have argued, they transcend the process of significatory figuration? To answer this question, I look to Jean-Luc Nancy, who rethinks portraiture’s conventions to theorize how it deconstructs its identificatory function. At the same time as the portrait presents a discrete subject it also reveals its absence, marking the singularity of the subject while separating it from an originary referent: “if the identification of the particular model is essential to any portrait that is designed to be recognized, the same cannot be said for the art of the portrait…” Nancy writes, “the model is wholly inessential to the portrait… [it] is what is essentially absent… its absence and not its being recognized is what matters most.” Along these lines, I want to depart from a model of portraiture that gives appearance to a subject, to recognize or resemble it by asserting the presence of an individual; rather, I discuss the possibility by which portraiture draws that subject outward, away from the appearance of a specific figure or identity.
	As Nancy intimates, the logic of the portrait is largely contradictory, and it is all the more so in Gonzalez-Torres’ work. In one respect, I have insisted that Gonzalez-Torres does not represent specific figures, and certainly his portraits do not present images of bodies that resemble particular persons. I would further argue that this claim encompasses works such as "Untitled" (1992) or "Untitled" (For Jeff) (1992) [fig. 1.9], photographs that depict close up images of human hands, and debatably constitute portraits themselves (if only portraits, simply, of hands). Despite the direct representation of the human body, the image is sufficiently close-cropped as to abstract it from an identifiable figure, rendering the question “who does this body belong to?” inconclusive if not, perhaps, irrelevant. In another respect, Gonzalez-Torres offers cues that refer to particular subjects, most obviously by alluding to certain themes or subjects in his titles, whether enigmatically (e.g. “Throat,” “Welcome Back Heroes,” or “Ischia”) or by stating relatively particular names and details (e.g. “Ross," “L.A.," “Marcel Brient”). Despite this tension between the refusal to represent figures and the readiness to name them, I believe that such references do not exhaust these works nor compromise them through the introduction of signification. While Gonzalez-Torres implies such subjects in his works, his works remain irreducible to the reference of any one individual, whether in body or name. They invoke a signifier that remains incomplete, a mark that produces a specific reference but refuses to fulfill its identificatory function by grounding the work in a specific signified. In that sense, these names resemble the contiguous circles in “Untitled” (Double Portrait), marks that signal the existence of portrait subjects, but which, in their abstraction, stop short of calling them forth as identifiable persons.
	The marker of the subject is therefore equally the marker of its absence, its being outside the portrait. These works conjure the portrait subject at the same time they withdraw it from the portrait itself, such that they displace the subject from its own presentation. As Ricco notes, these works invoke the portrait in the sense of its Italian word, ritratto (or the Spanish retrato), with its connotations of retreat: “the portrait... is always the presentation of the subject in retreat….” Or as Nancy notes, the portrait draws its subject outward (in the sense of French traiter, indicating “trait” as personal quality; “to pull,” as in withdrawal, “to trace;” “to process;” and “to treat,” as one treats a patient) setting the subject toward a space that is both inside and outside the work. For Nancy, the portrait subject is not an object of recognition that exists prior to its being put into an artwork (por-trayed), it is as much an effect of the portrait itself. “No longer… the self evidence of an interiority held within itself by the suspension of the world," this subject is drawn outside-itself and exposed to the world that it comes to relate to, rather than stand apart from as an isolated object. The portrait subject is not an identity contained but an appearance withdrawn; in effect, an absence. On this point I will recall that “to draw out” and “withdraw” denote the etymological meaning of “abstraction.” In sum, the work presents its subject in its abstraction, the absenting of a figure and the removal of the subject from its object, marking an empty space that the portrait takes the place of. The portrait does not then present its subject but nor does it necessarily not present it; rather, it implicates its subject in and as its externality, its passage outside the portrait. In this respect, the portrait indexes the displacement or dis-position of its subject: the movement between the inside and outside of the work by which the subject separates itself from its proper figuration and identification.
	Given the absence of a positive individuality, an identifiable figure that would stabilize the artwork, it is not evident what makes a portrait unique to its subject. Recalling that, for Gonzalez-Torres, neither the work’s parts nor the manifestation of a work “constitute a unique work of art,” I want to suggest the portrait’s uniqueness paradoxically exists in its non–uniqueness. A portrait is unique in its plurality, in that it may portray one subject only at the same time it may potentially portray any other, which is to say that no one subject exists at the exclusion of others. In the work’s abstraction, the portrait divests its subject of a position and a frame of reference with which to isolate it. This is not to posit a generality or an erasure of specificities as much as to affirm the portrait’s singular plurality, its co-existence with others. Thus, as Miwon Kwon notes, “[t]he radicality of [Gonzalez-Torres’] work lies in the insinuation of the particular in the place of abstraction, while simultaneously destabilizing the particular as a fixed positivity.” However, I want to posit that, even in naming the particular, the work does not efface abstraction as much as it mobilizes it in order to destabilize the subject and the referential ground for its positioning. In abandoning its proverbial monogamy, the portrait opens itself to the multiplicity of its existence, the plurality of being among others.
	By deconstructing the portrait as the sign of an individual figure, Gonzalez-Torres complicates the function of the portrait as such. In a different context, Benjamin Buchloh has illustrated what this kind of deconstruction entails, discussing significant precedents to Gonzalez-Torres' strategies. If the portrait "became the site where the myth of a natural motivation of the sign—that is, the mimetic model of representation, as much as the myth of a foundational concept of subjectivity—could be avidly reaffirmed by every generation of twentieth-century modernists," such conventions become undone with the counter-portraits of many pop artists. This process begins with Robert Rauschenberg's 1961 telegram that simply declares "THIS IS A PORTRAIT OF IRIS CLERT IF I SAY SO.” Here, Rauschenberg "shifts the representation of subjectivity onto the register of the performative declaration, asserting that the introduction into language and its iteration is one of the fundamental principles of the construction of subjectivity. Rather than theorizing subjecthood as a representable given, Rauschenberg's work conceives of the subject as a continuous performative process." In place of a static figure that would confer a present identity, the name’s invocation not only produces the subject, it continually re-produces the subject with each iteration. Rauschenberg's conceptual gesture detaches the subject and object of the portrait, questioning the capacity of signification to bind a sign to an essential subjectivity, whether through a name or an image. For Buchloh, this gesture finds company in Andy Warhol's compulsive serialization of the portrait. In Warhol’s mass-produced renderings of 